    Lecture 9
S C A LIN G LAW S - B A SIC S


           CS336
Taking scaling seriously
Imagine the following scenario..



              Your friend has given you ten thousand B200s for a month,
                      and asked you to build a good open source LM.



What do you do?
• Put together your infra team and distributed training framework (A2)
• Put together a great pretraining dataset (A4)
• Run a big model (but which one??) <- we are here.
Scaling isn’t easy
Wide or deep? How many heads? Which nonlinearity?




We could cargo cult things from existing LMs… but how do these get optimized in the first place?
Today: simple, predictive ‘laws’ for behaviors of LMs
 The approach -
           scaling laws which are simple, predictive rules for model performance


Old and unpleasant: tune hyperparameters on big models
New (over?) optimism: tune on small models, extrapolate to large ones
Part 1. Scaling laws, history and background.


❖ Data scaling as empirical sample complexities




❖ Initial forays into understanding neural scaling with data
Sample complexity and rates
Theorists have thought about ‘scaling’ for a long time..




                                              (learning in a finite set of k hypotheses)




                                              (generative modeling for smooth densities)

But these are upper bounds, not actual, realized loss values.
                                                      https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~epxing/Class/10701/slides/lecture16-VC.pdf
                                                      Hall, 1989
Earliest (data) scaling law paper – 1993
Early history of scaling laws – data scaling




           Log-linear scaling with data [Banko and Brill ‘01]
Early history of scaling laws – data scaling




Early tests of functional forms
  Kolachina et al 2012 – power law relation between data and downstream performance
Hestness et al 2017




Earliest ‘large scale neural’ scaling work: Hestness 2017
Predictable scaling on many tasks (MT, LM, Speech) and hypothesized scaling shape.
Hestness II
Very ahead of its time..



    “Emergence”




 Scaling by compute




 Speed = accuracy
Part 2. Neural (LLM) scaling behaviors


                         1.Data vs performance
            “Are there simple rules that determine how data affects
                                performance?”


                          2. Data vs model size
                 Do we train on more data or bigger models?


                3. Hyper-parameters vs performance
           “How should we set hyperparameters on the big model??”
 Scaling laws – power law relationships for many factors
 These scaling laws hold on many different kind of phenomena!




They even hold in non-
   standard settings


                                                                [Kaplan+ 2020]
Data vs performance
What’s a data scaling law?
         Data scaling laws : simple formula that maps dataset size (n) to error

What do we expect out of scaling laws?




       Monotonic, logistic-
          like curves




                                                                      [Hestness+ 2017]
Data scaling laws for language models
First, an empirical observation

           Loss and dataset size is linear on a log-log plot



                 Test Loss                           “Scale-free” or
                                                      “Power law”




               (For language modeling, from Kaplan+ 2020)
Conceptual foundations of data scaling laws.
Q: Why do scaling laws show up?

    We know error should be monotone

But why is it a power law / linear in log-log?


A (?): Estimation error naturally decays polynomially.

But this answer may take a moment to understand. Let’s work through an example.

Example: If our task is to estimate the mean of a dataset, what’s the scaling law?
Toy example: mean estimation

                        Input: 𝑥1 … 𝑥𝑛 ∼ 𝑁(𝜇, 𝜎 2 )
                                                       σ𝑖 𝑥 𝑖
                  Task: estimate the average as 𝜇ො =
                                                         𝑛


               What’s the error? By standard arguments..
                                              𝜎2
                               E 𝜇ො − 𝜇 2 =
                                              𝑛


                          This is a ‘scaling law’
                      log(𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟) = −log 𝑛 + 2 log 𝜎

         More generally, any polynomial rate 1/𝑛 𝛼 is a scaling law
Scaling law exponents: an intriguing mystery
                                                                                         1
Fact: Similar arguments show most ‘classical’ models (regression, etc) have scaling
                                                                                         𝑛


                               This means we should see y = −𝑥 + 𝐶
                               What do we find in neural scaling laws?




         Machine translation                    Speech                   Language modeling


                    Very different from predictions.. Why might this be?
Detour: scaling laws for (nonparametric) learning
Neural nets can approximate arbitrary functions. Lets turn that into an example.

Input: 𝑥1 … 𝑥𝑛 uniform in 2D unit box. 𝑦𝑖 = 𝑓 𝑥𝑖 + 𝑁(0,1)
Task: estimate f(x)
                                                        1
Approach: cut up the 2D space into boxes with length 𝑛 −4

What’s our estimation error?
                Informally, we have 𝑛 boxes, each box gets 𝑛 samples.
                               1
                     𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 ≈      + 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑠
                                𝑛

                                                                             𝟏
In 𝑑-dimensions, this becomes 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 = 𝑛 −1/𝑑 - This means scaling is 𝒚 = − 𝒙 + 𝑪
                                                                             𝒅
Takeaway: flexible ‘nonparametric’ learning has dimension dependent scaling laws.
Intrinsic dimensionality theory of data scaling laws
Some have made the following argument (Bahri 2021)
                                                              1
1. Scaling laws arise due to polynomial rates of learning
                                                             𝑛𝛼
2. Some argue the slope 𝛼 is closely connected to the intrinsic dimensionality of the data.




        But estimators of intrinsic dimension are sketchy, and this is not airtight..
Other data scaling laws
Data scaling thus far: how does dataset size relate to performance?
Related question: how does dataset composition affect performance


 ❖ Picking optimal data mixture using small scale models


 ❖ Deciding whether to repeat data or not


 ❖ Combing the two and balancing quality with repetition rate
Other advanced data scaling law: distribution shift
Data scaling thus far: how does dataset size relate to performance?
Related question: how does dataset composition affect performance

                    A: Data composition affects the offset, not the slope.

       These ‘distribution shift’ scaling laws can tell us about the importance of collecting diverse data!




                                                                                        [Hashimoto 2021]
In practice: data mixture selection via scaling is hard




Natural idea – build data scaling laws   Empirical eval – just take the best small dataset
 Scaling laws under data repetition
In practice, we have finite data – how does repeating examples affect scaling?




                                                                                 D’ = Effective data
                                                                                 Ud = Unique tokens
                                                                                 Rd* = Constant
                                                                                 Rd = Repetition
Scaling laws in compute unbounded settings
Important notes:
1. Scaling laws can ‘break’ if you blindly apply it
2. Scaling laws are lower bounds so you can always potentially do better
Data selection scaling and accounting for finiteness
Given that repeated data is less valuable..

Data selection should then be adaptive to scale !
Recap: data scaling laws


❖ Remarkably linear relationship between log-data size and log-error

❖ Holds across domains and models

❖ Theory understanding: similar to generalization bounds: mean estimation example

❖ Applications: data collection / curation
Scaling laws for model engineering
Now for what I promised at the start: model scaling!

Our motivation: how can we efficiently design huge LMs?
• LSTMs vs Transformers
• Adam vs SGD



How should we allocate our limited resources?
• Train models longer vs train bigger models?
• Collect more data vs get more GPUs?


               Scaling laws provide a simple procedure to answer these.
Hyperparameter questions

We’ll consider some of these choices in the context of the classic Kaplan scaling paper

•   Architecture

•   Optimizer

•   Aspect ratio / depth

•   Batch size
1. Architecture: transformers vs LSTMs
Q: Are transformers better than LSTMs?
Brute force way: spend tens of millions to train a LSTM GPT-3

Scaling law way:




                                                                [Kaplan+ 2021]
1. Many architectures




Cross-architecture scaling in Tay et al 2022.
2. Optimizer choice
What about ADAM vs SGD?




                                                                   [Hestness+ 2017]

     (Note, this is in 2017, so pre-transformers. RHN is recurrent highway nets)
3. Depth/Width: Number of layers
Does depth or width make a huge difference?




 • 1 vs 2 layers makes a huge difference.
 • More layers have diminishing returns below 107 params
3. Depth/Width: and other Transformer hypers

Do hyperparameters like the aspect ratio depend on scale?
3. Depth/Width: But not all parameters are made equal

We’ve been thinking about ‘parameters’ but not all parameters are equal




Embedding layer parameters don’t behave the same!

Related: recent papers on scaling laws for mixtures of experts.
Side note – ‘Value of parameters’
With MoEs, we expect parameter scaling to change
4. Batch size: Critical batch size




Batch size – known to have strong diminishing returns past a certain point.

Critical batch = min number of examples before diminishing returns (what does that mean?)
4. Critical batch size definitions..
What is critical batch size, more precisely?
• Pick a target loss and train 1). Steps needed (S), 2). Examples needed.
• Sweep over batches
The curve should follow roughly..




Fit for 𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑛 on this curve and pick




This balances both sides of the equation, giving roughly 2x the steps / passes optimal

          (this is claimed to be close to the ratio of the trace of the gradient covariance and squared norm of the gradient)
4. Batch size: critical batch size




The smaller the loss target,
   The bigger the batch
5. Learning rates: muP and scale-aware LR choices




                            Yang et al 2022                           Yao et al 2024


   If we naively scale up – optimal learning rate depends on scale.
   We need scaling aware initialization and learning rate scaling
Caution – scaling behaviors can differ downstream
Thus far: scaling is predictable and depends mainly on parameters
Catch: downstream scaling can often be much less predictable




                                                                    Tay et al 2023
Some surprising takeaways
      The effect of hyperparameters on big LMs can be predicted before training!

                                   -     Optimizer choice
                                       - Model depth
                               -        Architecture choice



                       The scaling law based design procedure.
1. Train a few smaller models
2. Establish a scaling law (e.g. ADAM vs SGD scaling law)
3. Select optimal hyperparam based on the scaling law prediction.
One important use of scaling laws
Q: Do we need more data or bigger models?

Clearly, lots of data is wasted on small models


Joint data-model scaling laws describe how the two relate

From Rosenfeld+ 2020,
                                   𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 = 𝑛−𝛼 + 𝑚−𝛽 + 𝐶

From Kaplan+ 2020
                                    𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 = 𝑚−𝛼 + 𝑛−1 𝛽

Provides surprisingly good fits to model-data joint error.
Model-data joint scaling is accurate
From Rosenfeld – fit scaling exponents on small data, small models. Predict rest.




Trading off data size and model size: optimize 𝑛 −𝛼 +𝑚 −𝛽 + 𝐶 with your costs.
 ‘Optimal’ compute and data tradeoffs as a case study.
 Rosenfeld, Kaplan both predict relationship of data, model and perf.
Kaplan claims: 𝑁𝑜𝑝𝑡 = 𝐶 0.73 , 𝐷𝑜𝑝𝑡 = 𝐶 0.27 (tokens per param decreases w/ C)

             Chinchilla [Hoffman et al] argue these fits are quite off.




                                                                          Hoffman+ 2022
Chinchilla in depth – 3 methods




 The chinchilla authors suggest 3 ways of fitting scaling laws – we’ll go over each.
     They mostly (minus method 3) suggest similar constants. More on this later..
Method 1 – minimum over runs.
                 Similar to the FLOPS figure on Kaplan –
        the minimum over the union of all training curves is a power law.
Method 2 - IsoFLOPS
Pick a range of FLOP budgets, vary the total parameter count, take the min over these
    convex shapes. The minima form a power law.
Method 3 – Joint fits
Run a bunch of models on the size-data grid. Use least squares to fit a joint scaling law
 Why do we have this big difference?
Kaplan claims: 𝑁𝑜𝑝𝑡 = 𝐶 0.73 , 𝐷𝑜𝑝𝑡 = 𝐶 0.27 (tokens per param decreases w/ C)




              Why such a big difference (when both fit joint scaling laws?)
Explanation 1




•   Kaplan removed last layer param from the count
•   Warmup at very small compute budgets was too high
•   (Decay itself is maybe not critical if batch / LR is properly tuned)
Explanation 2




     Non-embedding vs total param choice + small nonlinearities
Fun addendum – errors in chinchilla method 3
Note that this method three was likely flawed in the original paper. Some authors did
   data forensics, recovered the raw data, and re-did the fit and got results more
   consistent with methods 1 and 2




                                                                 [Besiroglu et al 2024]
Important note – train-optimal is likely not what you want
 Chinchilla aims to tell you what gives the best model for fixed training compute..
    But most of the compute in a real deployment is inference.. So we should ‘over’ train


 • GPT3 – 2 tokens / param
 • Chinchilla – 20 tokens / param
 • LLaMA65B – 22 tokens / param
 • Llama 2 70B – 29 tokens / param
 • Mistral 7B – 110 tokens / param
 • Llama 3 70B – 215 tokens / param
 … etc etc

 The more usage we expect, the more it becomes worth it to pay the upfront cost
Isoflops everywhere
Methods like IsoFLOPS are pretty easy to execute and usually pretty clean




                                                                      Diffusion - Gulrajani+ 2023.




                                                                            MoEs – Abnar+ 2025.
Scaling laws for models and compute

         Log-linearity extends to model parameters and compute!



            Lets us set the following based on small models
                            - Pick optimizer
                  - Pick architecture and model sizes



              Also lets us make smart resource tradeoffs
                       - Big models vs more data?
Recap: scaling laws – surprising and useful!



-   Data scaling: understand how data affects models, clean theory

-   Model scaling: dramatically reduce costs for training

-   Scaling as prediction: understand what problems can be ‘brute forced’
